Some of you must have received this Whatsapp
forward titled "Why I hate mathematics".
This is what the student opines:-
While in class, this is what they want me
to do. Five plus Five is what. Okay, that
can be done.
And then, they give me homework. They want
me to evaluate this complex expression. This
is doable too…
That is alright too.. While the classwork
and the homework are like this, how fair is
it to burden me with an exam like this..!
"With two sheep flying, one yellow and the
other headed right, how much does a kilo of
cement cost, given that the cow is 10 years
old?"
Whaaaat? What is the problem with our exams,
and can they be structured in some other way?
This is a topic that we may not be able to
do justice to, even spanning ten full Quotidians,
but I am going to just touch a little about
it today.
(Intro Music)
Namaste! This game, is called Zaxxon. My first
game. The first time I saw a computer, and
went "Aha", "Wow", "A Game? Playable on a
computer?".. I lost badly too, pretty soon!
No lives. Just an infinite scroller. Getting
harder and harder. You just have to manoeuver
your plane through all those obstacles. That's
all. One chance. All depends on how well you
do.
Games evolved after that. Some of you will
remember Dangerous Dave. This is Level One
of Dangerous Dave. You just have to go along
straight as an arrow, you climb, you lower
yourself, and open the door, and exit! And,
if you want, some diamonds to pick up along
the way. No trouble. Easy Peesy. How is Level
Two? How is Level Five? How is Level Ten?
A lot of monsters. A lot of timing. There
is a gun involved. There is a jetpack that
you will have to use judiciously. In a graded
level of difficulty, the Tenth is harder than
the First. Is it resembling school yet? Are
you able to draw some connections between
how education progresses exam after exam in
school and how Dangerous Dave progresses level
after level? The gameplay involved in this
pastime, is there something that we can take,
we can borrow, from this world. Do you see
those three lives up above and to the right?
Two of them… are gone. One life..! Can we
give our students a second chance if they
lose the first time?
Games evolved even more. Some of you will
remember Wolfenstein 3D. That was probably
the first pseudo-3D game. In that game, yes,
there were levels. But, within a level, there
were some spaces that were pretty hard to
cross. Too many enemies that could pick you
off too easily. So, at strategically placed
hidden spots, (and I still don't get why a
prison should have medpacks hidden inside
it!) you would get medical first aid kits.
If you touched them, you would get healthier.
How do we fashion suck medpacks in our school
curriculum? Can we let people who have injured
themselves get stronger without having to
restart the level?
And, while on the topic of "restarting a level",
I am reminded of even more evolved games.
Here is one more called "Dark Souls". In this
game, there would be a huge level. The hero
would be exploring a huge cave. In a large
castle, the hero would be defeating all enemies
and proceeding fast. Here and there, there
would be bonfires. If he goes to the bonfire
and warms his hands there, it is called a
Save Point. You don't have to go through that
whole exploration again, if you have reached
that Save Point. The more Save Points there
are, the easier it is for the players. For
students, the more Save Points there can be,
the easier will education be. Think about
that.
Games evolved even more. There is a game called
God of War. In this epic game called God of
War, this hero is fighting the nearly undefeatable
monster blocking his path. There is no Save
Point there. There is no Med Pack. He will
fight, and if he is injured, he adopts one
important trick. It is called Life Regen.
He will just run away from the enemy. From
that battlefield area, he just has to move
away from the action a bit, and just given
the time, and space, our hero will regenerate
his power. He fights. He gets injured. He
runs away from the battlefield. To survive.
To regen. To recoup. And comes back. What
lesson can we take from here and incorporate
into our education system, into our examination
system?
This person's name is Carleton Washburne.
In 1919, he came up with something called
the Winnetka Plan. An educationist. He was
the Principal of a school. And, he came up
with an idea. But, even a full hundred years
afterwards, his principles, amazing principles,
haven't been implemented anywhere. There are
facilities in place for it. The technology
is readily available. People have even proved
that it is a viable plan. But, somehow the
Winnetka Plan never got implemented. What
is this Winnetka Plan?
He said, students can either be asked to finish
something by some time. Whatever mastery you
get, finish it by this time. What.. You have
scored 60 percent in Maths? Okay, 40 is the
cutoff. You've got 60. So, please go to the
next level. NOT FAIR. Why? This person might
have skipped probability or permutations and
combinations or statistics, and the next year,
statistics is going to be even more important.
So,… basing it on a fixed time period,
and telling the student to achieve whatever
mastery they can in that allotted period and
keep running to the next one,.. a sort of
conveyor belt mechanism of education and examination
is wrong - says Washburne. He says, instead,
given them flexi-time, but freeze on the mastery.
"You have to achieve hundred percent mastery
on this subject. But, take as long as you
want." If he had proposed this in 1919, what
a foresightful genius he should have been?
But today, this is possible. With the smartphone
in your hand, with the ubiquitous internet,
with most classrooms already online because
of Covid, "take your time, achieve mastery!"
There is another twist to this thing. The
teacher gets to study not just the subject,
the teacher gets to study the student, and
customise the program per student. To suit
every student, in a way they will understand
it right, the program can be customised. That
was the Winnetka Plan. And that is my dream.
I wish educational institutions adopt or probably
at least adapt this model.
One of them has actually already done it.
Some of you may already know him. We have
seen him already. Sal Khan. Salman Khan. Not
the Bollywood actor Salman Khan, but the founder
of Khan Academy - Salman Khan. He says
knowledge itself is like a tree. Everything
connected to everything else. Each cascading
to further, deeper, broader, more fundamental
concepts. If you progress based on fixed time,
you will not have enough fundamentals for
you to build a proper structure, so give yourself
as much time as you want. That was the beginning
of the Flipped Classroom Approach. Give them
videos. Give them lectures. Let them watch
it as many times as they want. Let them watch
it in 2X speed. Let them watch it again and
again if they want. Let them come back and
in the classroom the teacher is not a sage
delivering lecture after lecture, the teacher
is a facilitator. Students sit around, question,
debate, expand, what else can we do with the
subject, give the opportunity for such discussions.
And, his tests, his examination methodology
follows two interesting approaches.
One, some of you may already know, is the
Adaptive Testing approach. If you do very
well, the next level gets harder. Progressively
harder. Until you hit a blockade, and the
next level is lowered to suit you. Your current
level of difficulty, for a problem you have
been given, is dependent on the previous four
or five questions that you have answered.
Many international evaluations already use
the Adaptive Mode.
He also introduced one more concept called
Streaking. He said, "I am not going to say
you did something very well because you got
something right, or you did something very
badly because you didn't get one thing right.
No. I am going to look for streaks. If you
do ten problems, consecutively, ten graded
adaptive problems, correctly, then, you have
mastered (Winnetka), we can move to the next
level".
One of my favorites.. Perhaps even the all
time favourite App is called Elevate. It is
calling itself a Brain Trainer App. But, basically,
it is a vocabulary-building and mathematics - simple
maths, algebra, probably some number sense
training App. In this App, they have a system
called the EPQ. Elevate Proficiency Quotient.
That EPQ is across all these aspects. And,
at various levels. Whatever level you are
in, to move to the next level is harder progressively.
If you are in the Beginner Mode, Beginner
to Intermediate may be an easy move. But,
if you are in the Advanced Mode, to move from
Advanced to Expert will be harder. If you
make one mistake, they will forgive you. If
you consecutively make two or three mistakes,
they won't punish you, they will help you,
by lowering your level. Do some research on
this. Really wonderful, beautiful, graded,..
it would almost seem as if there is some complex
Machine Learning going on inside the App all
the time.
What should we look for? If we are going to
conduct an evaluation,.. should we expect
them to remember everything we have taught
them… that's not what we should look for.
Instead, can we look for these things.. Can
we look for what they have learned? Can we
look for whether they are able to think critically?
See how their responses are? Can we see whether
they can come up with new responses that they
haven't been trained for? That creating..
can we look for that? Is there an emotional
quotient also involved that we can evaluate?
Also, how well can they work with others?
It is not about competition in the real world..
Can they work with others. And finally, can
they lead others? Can they inspire?
How are we going to track all these things
in an exam? If we can find methodologies that
will evaluate these, only then probably, exams
will become relevant. And… if we don't evaluate
for these, we will be stuck with situations
like this one. Just a year ago, IIT Delhi
came out with an advertisement like this.
They are looking for a Dog Handler, and they
want a B.Tech or equivalent undergraduate
degree.. Seriously?! A B.Tech undergraduate
degree for a dog handler? If things shouldn't
deteriorate to this, please, please, examine
your exams! Thank you!
And, yes, we will meet tomorrow! Bye Bye!